---
title: Henry James's Voyages
progress_bar: true
twitter: true
twitter_name: ShawnaRoss

---

class: middle, center

# Henry James's Voyages

## A map-in-progress

### _Shawna Ross <br> Arizona State University_

---

class: middle, center

# Follow at

## @ShawnaRoss <br> #incs15

### www.shawnaross.com/ <br> slides/incs2015.html

---

# Larger project: transatlantic travel institutions 
## & their literary & visual representations

* Literature about hotels and ocean liners foregrounds the institutions of transatlantic travel to critique transnational political, economic, and demographic systems.

* Writers like Henry James put the ocean liner to work as a trope, as a machine for transnational thought, by recovering the international tensions at play in ships whose construction attempted to hide these tensions.

---

# Why Henry James?

* 19 transatlantic crossings
** From the _Great Western_ (1843) to the _Mauretania_ (1911)
* All different ships
* Body of literature about it
** "The _Patagonia_"
** "Pandora"
** Letters
** Figurative language

---

# Goal: Interactive Map

* The Ship
** Line, shipyard, maiden voyage, capacity, engine, interiors
* The Journey
** Ports, length, route, weather, captain, cargo, crises
* The Life
** Reason, timing, reaction, health, letters, other passengers
* The Literature
** Links to his fiction (written about or during that crossing)
* The Culture
** Other representations of that liner or that voyage

---

# Why?

* Literary criticism
* Social history of ocean liners
* Transnational/transatlantic criticism/theory
* Experiment with multiple audiences for James online

---

# Where am I now?

* Research stage
* [Populating this spreadsheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/12YfgmfI_IuR0tygCsZFgl_s6gpSPJaTAKnBVbOj1n3o/edit?usp=sharing)

---

# Some preliminary charts

* What kinds of data do I have?
* What directions are the data pointing me?
* What further information do I need?

---

# Getting to the map

* Experimenting with a variety of tools
** Google Fusion Tables
** Neatline (Omeka)
** GeoBlacklight (Solr)
